RULES
THE GAME IN BRIEF
MONOPOLY is the game of buying, renting or selling Properties so
profitably that players increase their wealth – the wealthiest
becoming the eventual winner.
Starting from the "GO" space, move your token around the board
according to your roll of the dice. When you land on a Property that
is not already owned by anyone else, you may buy it from the Bank. If
you do not choose to buy it, it is auctioned off to the highest bidder.
Players who own Properties collect rents from opponents stopping
there. The construction of Houses and Hotels greatly increases the
rent you can collect, so it is wise to build on as many Sites as
possible. If you need to raise more money, the Bank can give
mortgages on Properties. You must always obey the instructions given
on Community Chest and Chance cards. Sometimes you will be sent
to Jail.
OBJECT
To be the only player left in the game who is not bankrupt.
EQUIPMENT
1 gameboard
10 playing tokens (including 2 spares)
28 Title Deed cards
16 Chance cards
16 Community Chest cards
1 pack of MONOPOLY money
32 Houses
12 Hotels
2 dice
SET UP
1. Arrange the Houses, Hotels, Title Deeds and money (in value order)
in the separate sections of the game tray.
2. Separate the Chance and Community Chest cards, shuffle them and
put them face down in the relevant spaces on the gameboard.
3. Each player selects a playing token and places it on "GO".
1

2
4. The Banker and the Bank
One player is elected Banker. If there are more than five players, the
Banker may choose to take on this role only.
The Banker gives each player £1,500 divided as follows:
Two x £500 Two x £10
Four x £100 One x £5
One x £50 Five x £1
One x £20
In addition to holding the money, the Banker also keeps the Title Deed
cards, Houses and Hotels until they are bought by the players. The
Banker also pays salaries and bonuses, lends money when required
on mortgages and collects all taxes, fines, loans and interest. In the
event of auctions, the Banker acts as auctioneer.
The Bank never "goes bankrupt" but can issue as much money as is
necessary in the form of IOUs written on ordinary paper.
5. Players roll both dice. The player with the highest score goes first
and play passes to the left.
PLAYING THE GAME
On your turn, roll both dice and move clockwise around the board in
the direction of the arrow. The space you land on will determine
what you have to do. Two or more tokens may rest on the same space
at the same time. You may do one of the following according to the
space you land on:
buy Building Sites or other Properties
pay rent by landing on an owned Property
pay taxes
draw a Chance or Community Chest card
go to Jail
rest on the Free Parking space
collect £200 salary
be “Just Visiting” Jail
Doubles
If you roll a double, move your token and act on the space you have
landed on as usual. Roll the dice again and have another turn. If you
roll a double for a third time in succession, you must immediately go
straight to Jail.
Passing "GO"
Every time you either land on or pass "GO" while moving in the
direction of the arrow, you are paid £200 by the Bank. It is possible
to collect £200 twice within one turn if, for example, you land on the
Chance or Community Chest space immediately after "GO" and pick
the card that tells you to "Advance to GO".

Buying Property
If you land on an unowned Property (that is, on a Property for which
no other player holds the Title Deed), you have the first choice to buy
it. There are three types of Property - Sites, Utilities and Stations. If you
decide to buy, pay the Bank the price in money stated on that space.
You will receive in exchange, as proof of ownership, that Property's
Title Deed, which you must keep face up in front of you. If you
decide not to buy, the Banker must immediately auction the Property
for sale to the highest bidder, starting at any price that another player
is willing to pay. Even though you declined the option of buying at
the original price, you may join in the bidding, too.
Owning Property
Owning Property entitles you to collect rent from any "tenants" who
land on that space. It is an advantage to own all the Sites within a
colour-group — in other words to own a monopoly. You can build
on any Site for which you own the complete colour-group.
Landing on Sites
If you land on a Site that has previously been bought by another
player, you may be required to pay rent for stopping there. The
player who owns this Site must ask you for rent before the player
following you rolls the dice. The amount payable is shown on the
Title Deed for that Site and will vary according to the number of
buildings on it. If all Sites within a colour-group are owned by a
player, the rent payable is doubled on any Site of that group not yet
built on. However, an owner who owns a whole colour-group may
not collect double rent if any one Site there is mortgaged. Where
Houses or Hotels have been built on a Site, the rent will increase and
will be shown on that Site's Title Deed. Rent is not payable on
mortgaged Properties.
Landing on Utilities
Landing on one of these allows you to buy the Utility if it is not already
owned. As with the other Property spaces, pay the Bank the price
stated on that space. If the Utility is already owned, you may be
asked to pay rent to the owner according to the dice you rolled to get
there. If the owner has only one of the Utilities, the rent will be four
times your dice roll. If, however, both Utilities are owned by the same
player, you must pay ten times the amount of your dice roll.
If you decide not to buy, the Banker auctions the Utility for sale to the
highest bidder. You may join in the bidding, too.
Landing on Stations
If you are the first to land here, you have the opportunity to buy the
Station. Otherwise it is auctioned by the Bank; even though you
declined to buy at the original price, you may join the bidding, too.
If the Station is already owned when you arrive, you must pay the
3

amount stated on the Title Deed. The amount payable will vary
according to the number of other Stations owned by that player.
Landing on "Chance" and "Community Chest"
Landing on one of these spaces means you must take the relevant card
from the top of the deck. These cards may ask you to:
move your token
pay money – for example, in taxes
receive money
go to Jail
get out of Jail free.
You must follow the instructions on the card and act immediately
before returning the card to the bottom of the deck. If you pick a "Get
Out of Jail Free" card, you may keep it until you wish to use it or sell
it at a mutually agreed price.
Note: a card may instruct you to move your token to another space.
If you pass "GO" on the way, collect £200. You do not pass "GO"
when you are sent to Jail, or if you are sent back (for example, to Old
Kent Road).
Landing on Tax spaces
When you land on these, simply pay the relevant amount to the Bank.
Free parking
If you land on this space, you simply rest here until your next turn.
There is no penalty for landing here: you may still undertake
transactions as usual (for example, collect rent, build on Sites you
own, etc.).
Jail
You will be sent to Jail if:
you land on the "GO TO JAIL" space, or
you pick a Chance or Community Chest card which tells you
to "GO DIRECTLY TO JAIL", or
you roll a double three times in succession on your turn.
Your turn ends when you are sent to Jail. If you are sent there, you may
not collect a £200 salary, regardless of where you are on the board.
To get out of Jail you may:
pay a fine of £50 and continue on your next turn, or
purchase a "Get Out Of Jail Free" card from another player
at a mutually agreed price and use this to get out, or
use a "Get Out Of Jail Free" card if you have one, or
wait there for three turns, rolling the dice on each turn to try
to roll a double. If you roll a double on any turn, move out
of Jail using this dice roll.
4

After you have waited three turns, you must move out of Jail and pay
£50 before moving your token according to your dice roll.
While in Jail you can collect rent on Properties provided they are not
mortgaged.
If you are not "sent to Jail" but, during the course of play, land on the
Jail space, you are "Just Visiting" and incur no penalty. On your next
turn, you move ahead as usual.
Houses
Once you own all Sites of a colour-group, you can buy Houses to put
on any of those spaces. This increases the rent you may charge to
tenants. The price of a House is shown on the relevant Title Deed.
You can buy on your turn or in between other players' turns but you
must build evenly: you cannot build a second House on any one Site
of a colour-group until you have built one House on every Site of that
group, and so on up to a maximum of four Houses per Site. Selling
Houses must be done evenly, too. You may buy or sell at any time,
and as many buildings as your judgement and financial standing will
allow. Houses may not be built if any Site of the same colour-group
is mortgaged. If you own all Sites of a colour-group and only one or
two of them have been built on, you can still collect double rent from
another player who lands on one of your unimproved Sites in that
colour-group.
Hotels
You must have four Houses on each Site of a complete colour-group
before you can buy a Hotel. Hotels are bought in the same way as
Houses and cost four Houses, which are returned to the Bank, plus the
price as shown on the Title Deed.
Only one Hotel may be erected on any one Site.
Building shortages
If there are no Houses left in the Bank, you must wait for other players
to return theirs before you can buy any. Similarly, when selling Hotels
you cannot replace them with Houses if there are none left.
If a limited number of Houses or Hotels is left and two or more players
wish to buy more than the Bank has, the Banker auctions them off to
the highest bidder, starting at the lowest price shown on the relevant
Title Deed(s).
Selling Property
You may sell undeveloped Sites, Railway Stations and Utilities to any
other player as a private transaction for a sum agreeable to both of
you. No Site, however, may be sold to another player if any buildings
stand on any of the Sites of that colour-group. Should you wish to sell
a Site from a colour-group, you must first sell all buildings on those
Sites to the Bank.
5

Houses must be sold evenly, in the same way as they were bought
(see "Houses" above). Houses and Hotels cannot be sold to other
players. They must be sold to the Bank at half the value stated on
the relevant Title Deed. They may be sold at any time.
For Hotels, the Bank will pay half the cash price of the Hotel plus half
the price of the four Houses which were given to the Bank for the
purchase of the Hotel. All Hotels on one colour-group may be sold
at once. If necessary, Hotels can be broken back down into Houses
to raise money. To do this, you can sell a Hotel to the Bank and
receive in exchange four Houses as well as money for the Hotel (i.e.
half its cost). Mortgaged Property cannot be sold to the Bank, but to
other players only.
Mortgages
If you have no money left and are required to pay a debt, you can
raise money by mortgaging a Property. If mortgaging a Site, first sell
any buildings to the Bank. To mortgage a Property, turn its Title Deed
face down and collect from the Bank your mortgage to the value of
the amount shown on the back of the card. When you wish to repay
your mortgage you must pay this amount plus 10% interest.
If you mortgage a Property, you retain possession of it. No other
player can secure it by paying off the mortgage to the Bank.
Rent cannot be collected on a mortgaged Property although it can still
be collected for other Properties of that colour-group.
You can sell mortgaged Property to other players at any agreed price.
The buyer can then decide to remove the mortgage immediately by
paying off the mortgage plus the 10% interest. Alternatively, he can
pay the 10% but retain the Property with a mortgage. In this case,
when the mortgage is finally removed an additional 10% is payable.
When all Sites of a colour-group are no longer mortgaged, the owner
may begin to buy back Houses at full price.
Bankruptcy
If you owe the Bank or another player more money than you can raise
from your assets, you are declared bankrupt and are out of the game.
If your debt is to the Bank, the Bank gains all your cash and Title Deeds.
The Banker then auctions off each Property to the highest bidder.
You must return "Get Out Of Jail Free" cards to the bottom of the
relevant pile.
If you are made bankrupt by another player, your Houses and Hotels
are sold to the Bank at half their original cost and that player receives
any cash, Title Deeds and "Get Out Of Jail Free" cards you own. If you
own any mortgaged Property, you must also turn this over to that
player; he must immediately pay 10% and then choose whether to
retain the mortgage or pay it off in full now.
Notes on play
If you owe more rent than you can pay in cash, you may pay your
creditor part in cash and part in Property (Building Sites must be
6

empty). In this case, the creditor may choose to accept certain
Property (even if it is mortgaged) at a value far in excess of the printed
one in order to obtain additional Properties or to block another player
from obtaining control of that Property.
If you own Property, it is up to you to watch out for rents to be
collected.
Money can only be loaned to a player by the Bank and then only by
mortgaging property.
No player may borrow money from or lend money to another player.
Winning
The last player left in the game is the winner.
RULES FOR A SHORT GAME
There are three differences in rules for this "Short Game."
1. During PREPARATION for play the Banker shuffles the deck of Title
Deed cards. The player to the left of the Banker then cuts the deck
and the Banker deals, one at a time, two Title Deeds to each player
(including himself if he both plays and acts as Banker). Players
receiving Title Deeds must immediately pay the Bank the printed price
of each of the two properties thus acquired. Play then starts as in the
standard game.
2. In this short game you need build only three Houses (instead of
four) on each Site of a complete colour-group before buying a Hotel.
Rent received for a Hotel remains the same as in the standard game.
When selling Hotels, the value is still one-half the purchase price,
which in this game is one House less than in the regular game.
3. END OF GAME. The first player to go bankrupt retires from the
game as in the standard game. However, as soon as a second player
goes bankrupt, the game ends. The bankrupt player turns over to his
creditor (either the Bank or another player) all that he has of value,
including buildings and any properties.
Each remaining player then adds together:
1 cash in hand;
2 Sites, Utilities and Stations owned by him at the price printed on
the board;
3 any mortgaged property owned by him at one-half of the price
printed on the board;
4 Houses, valued at purchase price;
7

5 Hotels, valued at the purchase price including the value of the
three Houses exchanged.
The richest player wins!
TIME LIMIT GAME
Here's another short game you can try. Before starting, agree upon a
definite time to finish the game, with the richest player at this time
winning. Before starting the game, Title Deed cards are shuffled and
cut, and the Banker deals two to each player. Players immediately pay
the Bank the price of Property dealt to them and play continues as
with the standard game.